Patient Education Sheet
Understanding Clinical Trials
by Herbert S. Baraf, MD, FACP, MACR
Clinical Professor of Medicine, George Washington University; and
Managing Partner, Arthritis & Rheumatism Associates, PC, Wheaton, Maryland

Clinical Research, Clinical Trials, Clinical Studies, Protocols
These are terms that describe the process by which we advance our understanding of disease and make medical
progress in treatment.

Goals of Clinical Research
n	 Identify causes of disease
n	 Evaluate treatment options with either new or
existing medications or therapies
n	 Compare treatments

Phase 1

Phases of Drug Development
Before being tested in humans, new treatments are
usually evaluated in animals to evaluate basic measures of
therapeutic effect and safety. Once certain safety criteria
are met and the nature of the effect a drug has in animals
is understood, the drug may move on to testing in human
volunteers. This testing occurs in four phases:

Phase 3

n	 The first testing of a drug in humans
n	 Conducted with a small number of volunteers
(20-100 participants)

n	 Larger number of patients with disease studied
(from 200 to >3,000); Primary concern is
effectiveness and safety

n	 Purpose is to determine how the body handles a
drug – how it is metabolized and eliminated

n	 About 25-30% of new treatments are eventually
approved

n	 Screens for adverse effects

Phase 2
n	 Small-scale program in up to a few hundred
patients with the targeted disease
n	 Purpose is to evaluate efficacy and side effects and
to determine ideal dosing
n	 About 33% of drugs studied in phase 2 go on to
the next phase

Phase 4
n	 These studies are usually performed after a drug
has been approved.
n	 Often mandated by the FDA and agreed to by the
sponsor (drug company) as a condition of drug
approval
n	 Large-scale program evaluating several thousand
volunteers with focus on safety

Will I always get the new drug if I participate?
Earlier phase trials usually dispense the new medication to all patients.
Later phase trials usually involve randomly receiving a placebo or the medication being tested in one or more doses.
This is called a placebo-controlled Randomized Clinical Trial (RCT) and is considered the gold standard for determining
whether a medication works or not. Neither the patient or the clinician knows whether the patient is receiving a
placebo or the drug.
In some late phase trials, all patients will receive the active drug; the informed consent and the personnel conducting
the study will make this clear at the outset of the trial
Please see the Patient Education Sheet on “Clinical Trials – Getting Involved” for more information on clinical trials.
This sheet will appear in the summer 2017 issue of the Sjögren’s Quarterly and is available on the SSF website at
http://www.sjogrens.org/home/about-sjogrens/brochures-and-fact-sheets.
Additional information and a list of specific trials currently available for enrollment can be viewed by visiting http://
www.sjogrens.org/news/486-sjogrens-s-clinical-trials.
For more information on Sjögren’s, contact the Sjögren’s Syndrome Foundation at:
6707 Democracy Blvd, Suite 325, Bethesda, MD 20817 • 800-475-6473 • www.sjogrens.org • ssf@sjogrens.org.
Clinicians: Please make multiple copies of this Patient Education Sheet and distribute to your patients.

