Patient Education Sheet
Health Insurance Tips – Part 1

Obtaining healthcare reimbursement can be a major challenge. Having Sjögren’s places a high enough burden on
patients, and adding the barriers patients face in obtaining health insurance reimbursement increases that burden
greatly. This tip sheet should help you increase your chances of success when requesting reimbursement and
appealing denials for a claim.

Know your insurance policy and what it covers.
n	 Note whether prior authorization is needed for a
specific therapy or procedure.
n	 Understand co-pays and how much you will be
expected to contribute to the cost.
n	 Know whether your insurance company requires
“step therapy,” which means you must try and fail
one therapy before the next level of therapy can
be covered.

Make sure your medical records are accurate.
n	 Maintain copies of your medical records. You have
the right to receive copies of all of your medical
records. Note that you can be charged a copy fee.

Include a Letter of Medical Necessity.
n	 A Letter of Medical Necessity is usually written by
the physician explaining why a therapy or other
treatment is medically necessary. This can be
included with an initial claim or included in the
appeals process.
n	 A Sample Letter of Medical Necessity for dental
treatment can be found on the SSF website under
“Brochures and Resource Sheets.”

Know how your insurance company handles
biologics if you are considering one.
n	 Insurance companies can exclude a drug from
coverage or it might be a “tiered” drug, meaning
one that is designated at a certain level for how
much the patient must cover.

Always appeal denials!
n	 Appeal a denial at every level. Most patients receive
at least partial reimbursement upon appealing a
negative decision from their insurance company.
n	 Involve your doctor in helping you respond to a
denial.
n	 Familiarize yourself with your insurance company’s
guidelines and deadlines for appeal. This
information is usually included in the denial letter.
n	 Make sure you have the necessary documentation
showing that your case meets the insurance
provider’s guidelines and demonstrates medical
need.
n	 Maintain records of your communication with the
insurance company and document every time you
speak or hear from a company representative.
Record the person’s name, date, time and key
messages from the conversation.
n	 Understand why you were denied, so you can
address the reason(s) directly.
n	 If you are communicating with the Customer
Service office of the insurance company and are
dissatisfied with the response, ask for a Nurse
Case Manager or a Supervisor who might be more
understanding of your situation.
n	 When possible, demonstrate that treatment is more
cost-effective than alternatives or non-treatment.

If you are still denied following the final round of appeals,
contact the advocacy or patient assistance program for the
company that produces the therapy. Most companies have
n	 If not covered, or if the patient coverage is too high,
divisions that take applications for financial assistance for
request an exemption along with an explanation
their therapies.
about why you need the drug from your physician.

For more information on Sjögren’s, contact the Sjögren’s Syndrome Foundation at:
6707 Democracy Blvd, Suite 325, Bethesda, MD 20817 • 800-475-6473 • www.sjogrens.org • ssf@sjogrens.org.
Clinicians: Please make multiple copies of this Patient Education Sheet and distribute to your patients.

